# Monorail Prediction Service

The Monorail prediction service is a separate appengine module running in a
Managed VM with a custom runtime.  We have to run it this way because it depends
on libraries (sklearn, e.g.) that do not come with the standard AppEngine
runtime, nor with the
[```python```](https://cloud.google.com/appengine/docs/flexible/python/) runtime
that comes with [AppEngine Flexible
Environment](https://cloud.google.com/appengine/docs/flexible/). Hence the
docker file.

On startup, the service will load some prediction model files from GCS and
un-pickle them (these files are generated by some internal batch jobs beyond the
scope of this doc TODO: write a doc for these and link to it). This loading and
processing takes some time, during which /_ah/health will return a 503 "Service
Unfavailable" response code.  Once the loading is complete it will return 200
ok.

The API is very simple, and for now only provides suggestions for Issue
Components based on text entered by the user: ```POST``` to ```/_predict``` a
JSON object of the form: ```{'text': 'text to classify'}``` and it will return
a JSON object of the form:

```
{'components': ['Component1', 'Component2', 'etc']}
```

There is an additional resource for logging accept actions: ```GET``` to
```/_log``` and any parameters are stored in GAE's request logs for the
```predict``` service. The JS client will request it whenever the user accepts
one of the component suggestions. We should add more detailed logging for
accept/reject actions in the future, but this should give us a rough
approximation of the accept rate for the time being.

## Development

### Authorization Key

You will need an auth token json file. Go to the 
[monorail-predict Service Accounts page](https://console.cloud.google.com/iam-admin/serviceaccounts/project?project=monorail-predict)
(or the [monorail-predict-staging Service Accounts page](https://console.cloud.google.com/iam-admin/serviceaccounts/project?project=monorail-predict-staging))
and select the options menu (three dot menu on the far right) for the
"App Engine default service account" service account. Then select "Create key"
from the dropdown menu. In the "Create private key" pop-up dialog, select
"JSON" for the key type and then click on "Create". This will download a file
named monorail-predict-something.json to your Downloads directory on your
workstation. 

You should then run

```
export GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS=~/Downloads/monorail-predict-whatever.json
```

before running the actual server, in the same shell where you will run the
server. Make sure this environment variable is always set before trying to
run the server because it will fail to load the model files from GCS if you
don't.

Finally, to start the servier from this directory:

```
gunicorn -b :5000 service:app
```

Or just running this should work too:

```
python service.py
```

Use port 5000 so it doesn't conflict with your regular monorail devserver
running on 8080.

You may need to install several python packages locally before you can run this
service. See the Dockerfile for details on what it expects to be installed
already. If you are brave and have docker installed already, try runing it with
docker instead!

## Deployment
To deploy, from this directory:

```
gcloud app deploy app.yaml --project=monorail-predict
```

The service itself is exposed on staging as
[monorail-predict.appspot.com](https://monorail-predict.appspot.com/)

### Debugging Deployment Issues
If you run into problems (deployment fails, saying the instance may be
"unhealthy", e.g.), check the ```stderr``` and ```stdout``` logs for the
```predict``` service on devconsole.  There may be a missing dependency that you
have locally but isn't included in the Dockerfile.


