# Buildbucket

Buildbucket is a generic build queue. A build requester can schedule a build
and wait for a result. A building system, such as Buildbot, can lease it, build
it and report a result back.

[TOC]

## Build

A build is an element of buildbucket. It can be scheduled, leased, started, and
completed.

A Build JSON object may have the following keys:

*   `id`: a unique ID of build, generated by buildbucket. Ids are monotonically
    decreasing integers. Queries return builds sorted by id, thus new builds are
    first.
*   `created_ts`: timestamp when the build was created.
*   `created_by`: identity string (e.g. email) of who made a request to create a
    build.
*   `bucket`: a string that defines what project/subproject a build belongs to.
    Required.
*   `tags`: indexed key-value pairs, such as
    `["buildername:Release", "requester:cq"]`. Builds can be searched by tags.
    Also see tag [conventions](#Conventions).
*   `parameters_json`: an immutable JSON blob passed by a build requester,
    represents build parameters. The format is specific to a build-system.
    Not reqiured by buildbucket, but may be required by a particular
    build-system, such as [Buildbot](buildbot.md).
*   `url`: a URL to a build-system-specific human-viewable page that displays
    build status. Set by a build-system when the build is started.
*   `lease_expiration_ts`: when current lease will expire, if any.
*   `lease_key`: a key generated by buildbucket to a leasee. The leasee must
    pass it when it mutates the build.
*   `status`: current status of the build, can be one of:
    *   `"SCHEDULED"`: available for processing.
    *   `"STARTED"`: leased and is being processed.
    *   `"COMPLETED"`: completed and cannot be changed. See `result` field for
        more info.
*   `status_changed_ts`: timestamp when last time build status has changed.
*   `completed_ts`: timestamp when the build was completed.
*   `result`: final result of the build. Can be set only in `COMPLETED` state.
    Can be one of:
    *   `"SUCCESS"`: the build has succeeded.
    *   `"FAILURE"`: the build has failed. See `failure_reason` field for more
        info.
    *   `"CANCELED"`: the build has been canceled. See `CancelationReason` for
        more info.
*   `result_details_json`: an immutable JSON blob passed by a build-system on
    build completion. Represents the result of the build.
*   `failure_reason`: why the build failed. Can be one of:
    *   `"BUILD_FAILURE"`: the build has failed normally, not due to an
        infrastructure failure.
    *   `"INFRA_FAILURE"`: infrastructure failure happened.
    *   `"BUILDBUCKET_FAILURE"`: buildbucket failure happened.
    *   `"INVALID_BUILD_DEFINITION"`: a build system could not understand the
        definition of the build. See `result_details_json` for more info.
*   `cancelation_reason`: why the build was canceled. Can be one of:
    *   `"CANCELED_EXPLICITLY"`: the build canceled was requested externally.
    *   `"TIMEOUT"`: the build was canceled on timeout. Not supported yet.
*   `updated_ts`: timestamp when the build was modified last time.
    A modification includes leasing.
*   `utcnow_ts`: current UTC time on the server.

All timestamps are in milliseconds since Unix Epoch.

## API

API for build requesters:

*   [put] and [put_batch]: schedule a build.
    [Example in python](examples/schedule.py).
*   [get]: get an existing build.
*   [cancel] and [cancel_batch]: cancel build(s) by id.
*   [search]: search for builds by bucket, tags, result, etc.

API for build systems:

*   [peek]: get a list of pending non-leased builds.
*   [lease]: lease a build.
*   [start]: mark a build as started.
*   [heartbeat] and [heartbeat_batch]: extend a build lease.
*   [succeed]: mark a build as succeeded.
*   [fail]: mark a build as failed.

Also see [go/buildbucket-design] for more details.

## Leasing a build

A build-system is supposed to [lease] a build before processing it. A build
lease is exclusive and a build cannot be mutated without a lease. A leasee
receives a `lease_key` that it uses for mutation. When a build is leased, it is
not returned in [peek] API call. When build lease expires, buildbucket makes the
build available again.

## Conventions

Some conventions were established in order to build requesters and build systems
work together.

### buildset tag

The `buildset` tag is used to group related builds.

If a build is related to a CL revision, buildset should have format:

*   For Rietveld: `patch/rietveld/<hostname>/<issue_id>/<patchset_id>`
*   For Gerrit: `patch/gerrit/<hostname>/<numeric_change_id>/<hash>`

When a build triggers a new build, the buildset tag must be copied.

### user_agent tag

Since there may be different build requester systems, you may want to
distinguish builds by different build requesters. The `user_agent` tag is used
for that. Known chrome-infra build requesters:

*   `"cq"`: Chromium Commit Queue
*   `"rietveld"`
*   `"git_cl_try"`

## Buildbot integration

Buildbot is integrated with buildbucket, with two-way sync. Using buildbucket
you can schedule, cancel, search and read build results (but no logs).
Read more in
[buildbot-buildbucket README.md](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/tools/build/+/master/scripts/master/buildbucket/README.md).

## Configuration

Buckets are registered in `<buildbucket-app-id>.cfg` files in `infra/config`
branch of project repositories, for example in
[chromium/src repo](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src/+/infra/config/cr-buildbucket.cfg).
See [BuildbucketCfg protobuf message](http://luci-config.appspot.com/schemas/projects:buildbucket.cfg)
for file format.

### Access control

Each bucket has its own ACLs. By default a bucket is accessible only by admins.
If a bucket does not exist, its ACL is considered default.

[cr-buildbucket]: https://cr-buildbucket.appspot.com
[go/buildbucket-design]: http:/go/buildbucket-design
[cancel]: http://cr-buildbucket.appspot.com/_ah/api/explorer/#p/buildbucket/v1/buildbucket.cancel
[cancel_batch]: http://cr-buildbucket.appspot.com/_ah/api/explorer/#p/buildbucket/v1/buildbucket.cancel_batch
[fail]: http://cr-buildbucket.appspot.com/_ah/api/explorer/#p/buildbucket/v1/buildbucket.fail
[get]: http://cr-buildbucket.appspot.com/_ah/api/explorer/#p/buildbucket/v1/buildbucket.get
[heartbeat]: http://cr-buildbucket.appspot.com/_ah/api/explorer/#p/buildbucket/v1/buildbucket.heartbeat
[heartbeat_batch]: http://cr-buildbucket.appspot.com/_ah/api/explorer/#p/buildbucket/v1/buildbucket.heartbeat_batch
[lease]: http://cr-buildbucket.appspot.com/_ah/api/explorer/#p/buildbucket/v1/buildbucket.lease
[peek]: http://cr-buildbucket.appspot.com/_ah/api/explorer/#p/buildbucket/v1/buildbucket.peek
[put]: http://cr-buildbucket.appspot.com/_ah/api/explorer/#p/buildbucket/v1/buildbucket.put
[put_batch]: http://cr-buildbucket.appspot.com/_ah/api/explorer/#p/buildbucket/v1/buildbucket.put_batch
[search]: http://cr-buildbucket.appspot.com/_ah/api/explorer/#p/buildbucket/v1/buildbucket.search
[start]: http://cr-buildbucket.appspot.com/_ah/api/explorer/#p/buildbucket/v1/buildbucket.start
[succeed]: http://cr-buildbucket.appspot.com/_ah/api/explorer/#p/buildbucket/v1/buildbucket.succeed
